What is an operating system?
It's good question, we've been
talking a lot about operating systems,
and we never really actually
defined what one is.
And you might not have actually given much
thought to what an operating system is,
even though you kind of know what one is.
You have one on your phone,
your computer, your game console.
An operating system, or an OS,
is a collection of programs that manages
the internal workings of the computer.
So when a program wants to write data then
retrieve it later, the OS ensures that
the application is able to do so as
quickly, easily, and safely as possible.
An operating system has a number
of management functions.
Process management,
security management, file management,
communications management, resource
management, and memory management.
The way all these work together is really
what makes up the heart of the OS.
Typically applications running on
an operating system interface with
the operating system through a simplified
series of interfaces called APIs, or
application programming interfaces.
Let's get into one of those functions,
process management.
Typically a process can be in
one of five states, new, ready,
running, waiting, and terminated.
In the new state, a process is in the
stage of being created, it's being built.
In the ready state,
the process is ready, it's waiting for
pickup, but
the CPU is busy doing something else.
In the running state, the CPU has grabbed
that process, it's picked it up and
it's actively working with it.
Okay, now the waiting state, this is
where it gets a little bit interesting.
A process typically doesn't just start and
end all by itself.
It might need to read some,
data prompt the user for some input, or
it might have to kick off
a couple sub-processes.
And while it's doing that,
while it's waiting for
them to finish,
the process can be put into a wait state.
And when it's in a wait state,
it's waiting.
And finally, when the process
has accomplished its task and
there's nothing else for it to do,
it goes into the terminated state.
So you can see the general
flow of things here.
It starts out new, and then it goes into
ready, and then it goes into running.
From there, it either goes into the
terminated state, which says it's done for
one reason or another.
It either did everything it needed
to do or something else happened, or
it goes back to ready.
There are two ways it
can go back to ready.
The first is in the case of a wait,
where it's waiting for
more data, user input, or for
another process to finish.
Or if the CPU is like hey,
I know you're really busy and
you're trying to do your stuff.
I've got a bunch of other programs
trying to do something too, so
I'll be right back, and
that's called an interrupt.
An interrupt is just that, it kind of
interrupts the process and says,
sit right here, be patient,
go into a ready state.
And I'll come back and get you and
finish you when I have time to do that.
That's the only way that a computer
can work on multiple programs
at the same time.
Now, a process can go back and
forth between running and
ready a whole bunch of
times before it completes.
And that's a good thing,
because if programs could only run in
a straight line from ready to finished,
we wouldn't be able to run more than
one program at a time on a computer.
Then there's security management.
Obviously, security very, very important
on a mainframe, because we're dealing with
the world's most important financial data,
health records, personal records.
So security, very important,
we're going to talk more about that later.
Up next, file management.
On the Z, we try to offload as much of the
work away from the application to the OS
as possible.
So rather than making the application keep
track of where everything was stored and
where to get it later,
we let the file management handle that.
Communications management takes care of
all the network communications, very,
very important.
And then there's the resource management.
This makes sure that all of
the programs running on the system
played nicely with one another.
It looks at everything competing for
the same resources, like CPU and memory,
network, disk.
And it makes sure everyone kind of
gets a fair swat at those resources.
Resource management is
the cornerstone of modern computing.
And lastly, there's memory management.
We're going to get into this in
much greater detail later on.
But suffice to say on the mainframe,
we want our applications to run as
quickly and efficiently as possible.
And one way of doing that is by
abstracting all the complexities of
memory management away
from the developer and
their applications and handling them
in the memory management function.
And there you have it,
that's your six management
functions of an operating system.
Now, some of them might
have seemed obvious,
while others might not
seem all that vital.
But I tell you what, you take away any one
of them, and you'd have a really hard time
getting anything done on
a modern operating system.